Rework dns server and transparent endpoint injection (#941)
localstack/docs: content/en/user-guide/tools/transparent-endpoint-injection/dns-server.md

  - /tools/local-endpoint-injection/dns-server/
---

LocalStack includes a DNS server that enables seamless connectivity to LocalStack from different environments using `localhost.localstack.cloud` (Community + Pro).
The DNS server is available on all IPv4 addresses within the LocalStack container (i.e., listening to `0.0.0.0`) and resolves `localhost.localstack.cloud` to the LocalStack container.
Therefore, containers that are configured to use the DNS server can reach LocalStack using `localhost.localstack.cloud`.
This configuration happens automatically for containers created by LocalStack, including compute resources such as Lambda, ECS, and EC2.
Your container can be configured to use the DNS server as demonstrated in the [Network Troubleshooting guide]({{< ref "references/network-troubleshooting/endpoint-url#from-your-container" >}}).
If you wish to use the DNS server on your host system, follow the instructions under [System DNS configuration]({{< ref "dns-server#system-dns-configuration" >}}).

> LocalStack Pro additionally offers a transparent execution mode (active by default), which enables seamless connectivity to LocalStack without changing your application code.

Author: fully agree, pro standardize 👍 

I think we don't have any standard and "transparent execution mode" vs "Transparent Endpoint Injection" also triggered me somewhat. With the separation of "Transparent Endpoint Injection" (noun-feature) and "DNS server" (separate feature), this makes a lot of sense 💯

> LocalStack Pro additionally offers a transparent execution mode (active by default), which enables seamless connectivity to LocalStack without changing your application code.

Author: 👉  going forward with "Transparent Endpoint Injection"

> LocalStack Pro additionally offers a transparent execution mode (active by default), which enables seamless connectivity to LocalStack without changing your application code.

Author: at least it clarifies better if someone does not understand the baseline 👍

Therefore, your application seamlessly accesses the LocalStack APIs instead of the real AWS APIs.
For local testing, you might need to disable SSL validation as explained under [Self-signed certificates]({{< ref "dns-server#self-signed-certificates" >}}).

{{< alert title="Notes" >}}
On your host machine, `localhost.localstack.cloud` resolves to `localhost` using a public DNS entry by LocalStack unless your router has [DNS rebind protection]({{< ref "dns-server#dns-rebind-protection" >}}) enabled.
{{< / alert >}}

## Configuration

This section explains the most important configuration options summarized under [Configuration]({{< ref "configuration#dns" >}}).

### Transparent endpoint injection (Pro)

If you do not want Lambda functions to use the transparent endpoint execution mode in LocalStack Pro, opt out using:

```bash
DISABLE_TRANSPARENT_ENDPOINT_INJECTION=1
```

This option disables DNS resolution of AWS domains to the LocalStack container and prevents Lambda from disabling SSL validation.
With disabled transparent endpoint execution mode, the AWS SDK within Lambda functions might connect to the real AWS API.

> The transparent endpoint execution mode is only available in LocalStack Pro.

Author: added this pointer to the TEI page 👍

### DNS Server bind address

If you experience problems when running LocalStack and the DNS server is the issue, you can disable the DNS server using:

```bash
DNS_ADDRESS=0
```

{{< alert title="Warning" color="warning" >}}
We do not recommend disabling the DNS server since this disables resolving `localhost.localstack.cloud` to the LocalStack container.
{{< / alert >}}

> This option is primarily used by [LocalStack developers]({{< ref "contributing/development-environment-setup" >}}) in host mode because binding port 53 requires root privileges and port 53 might be occupied.

Author: moved to the end to de-emphasize following the order discussion above

### Fallback DNS server

If you want to use another upstream DNS resolver than Google (default `8.8.8.8`),
specify the fallback DNS server where all non-redirected queries (i.e., not matching `DNS_LOCAL_NAME_PATTERNS`) will be forwarded to:

```bash
DNS_SERVER=1.1.1.1
```

### Custom redirects

If you want to resolve only certain AWS URLs to LocalStack,
specify a comma-separated list of hostname regex patterns such as:

```bash
DNS_LOCAL_NAME_PATTERNS='.*(ecr|lambda).*.amazonaws.com'
```

> Using this configuration, the LocalStack DNS server only resolves ECR and Lambda domains to LocalStack, and the rest will be resolved via the `DNS_SERVER` (i.e., the real DNS entry by default).
> This can be used for hybrid setups, where certain API calls (e.g., ECR, Lambda) target LocalStack, whereas other services will target real AWS.
> The regex pattern follows Python flavored-regex and can be tested at [regex101.com](https://regex101.com/r/OzIsQa/1).

Reviewer: **This is why we need to rename this variable!!!!!**.

Any queries matching these regexes are _ignored_ by the LocalStack DNS server, so with TEI on anything _not_ matching these regexes is resolved by LocalStack, and `*.ecr.*.amazonaws.com` and `*.lambda.*.amazonaws.com` are forwarded to the upstream resolver.

Here we split the regex by whitespace and add each entry to the skip list in the resolver:
https://github.com/localstack/localstack/blob/4b7482d22e81bfff8c43f8b74eaeadb60bc6debf/localstack/dns/server.py#L831-L833

and here we skip local resolution if the domain matches:
https://github.com/localstack/localstack/blob/0bb7ce612be52a65c218377cdb04a14a215c6ba1/localstack/dns/server.py#L398-L409

```suggestion
Using this configuration, the LocalStack DNS server resolves all AWS domains to LocalStack _except_ ECR and Lambda domains which will be resolved via the `DNS_SERVER` (i.e., the real DNS entry by default).
This can be used for hybrid setups, where certain API calls (e.g., ECR, Lambda) target AWS, whereas other services will target LocalStack.
The regex pattern follows Python flavored-regex and can be tested at [regex101.com](https://regex101.com/r/OzIsQa/1).
```

Author: omg 🤦 yess 💯 
I looked up the implementation and messed it up getting confused every time I try to read the config name 🙃 

Fixed 👍

[The regex101 link is maintained by Joel Scheuner (requires linking to GitHub or Google account).
It redirects to the main page if the saved example would not work.]: #

{{< alert title="Warning" color="warning">}}
Use this configuration with caution because we generally do not recommend connecting to real AWS from within LocalStack. 
{{< /alert >}}

> ## Self-signed certificates

Reviewer: I think this step could remain with the TEI docs, since it is not specific to the DNS server but rather TEI.

Author: I think this option does indeed refer to `DNS_LOCAL_NAME_PATTERNS` because skipping LocalStack resolution enables connecting to real AWS 🤔 (at least in it's original use)

I agree that it also fits for disabling transparent endpoint injection.

In the transparent execution mode using DNS in LocalStack Pro, you may still have to configure your application's AWS SDK to accept self-signed certificates.

> This is a technical limitation caused by the SSL certificate validation mechanism, due to the fact that we are repointing AWS domain names (e.g., `*.amazonaws.com`) to `localhost`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a technical limitation caused by the SSL certificate validation mechanism, due to the fact that we are repointing AWS domain names (e.g., `*.amazonaws.com`) to `localhost.localstack.cloud`.
```

Author: I don't like "technical limitation", it's a security feature ;)

Author: fixed `localhost` and re-phrased this part in the context of TEI

Make sure to use this only for local testing, and never in production.
{{< /alert >}}

## Customizing internal endpoint resolution

The DNS name `localhost.localstack.cloud` (and any subdomains like `mybucket.s3.localhost.localstack.cloud`) is used internally in LocalStack to route requests, e.g., between a Lambda container and the LocalStack APIs.

> Please refer to the steps in the [Route53 docs]({{< ref "route53" >}}) for more details on how the internal DNS name can be customized.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I follow what this section is documenting. It is talking about how we use `localhost.localstack.cloud` internally to communicate between LocalStack components, but then it mentions how this value can be customised by Route53. I would suggest that mentioning Route53 is _additive_, but also that `LOCALSTACK_HOST` can be used to customise the actual domain used.

Author: @dfangl knows all the legacy history once he is back ;)

Author: FYI: I ended up re-phrasing it in the new [LocalStack endpoints section](https://docs.localstack.cloud/user-guide/tools/dns-server/#localstack-endpoints) based on @simonrw suggestion of mentioning `LOCALSTACK_HOST`.

@dfangl feel free to chime in if you remember what the real purpose was 🪄 :)

If you are using the LocalStack DNS server, DNS rebind protection should not cause any issues.
{{< / alert >}}

You can check if your DNS setup works correctly by resolving a subdomain of `localhost.localstack.cloud`:
{{< command "hl_lines=16">}}
$ dig test.localhost.localstack.cloud

; <<>> DiG 9.16.8-Ubuntu <<>> test.localhost.localstack.cloud
;; global options: +cmd
;; Got answer:
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, status: NOERROR, id: 45150
;; flags: qr rd ra; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 2, AUTHORITY: 0, ADDITIONAL: 1

;; OPT PSEUDOSECTION:
; EDNS: version: 0, flags:; udp: 65494
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;test.localhost.localstack.cloud. IN	A

;; ANSWER SECTION:
test.localhost.localstack.cloud. 10786 IN CNAME	localhost.localstack.cloud.
localhost.localstack.cloud. 389	IN	A	127.0.0.1

;; Query time: 16 msec
;; SERVER: 127.0.0.53#53(127.0.0.53)
;; WHEN: Fr Jän 14 11:23:12 CET 2022
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 90
{{< /command >}}

If the DNS resolves the subdomain to your localhost (127.0.0.1), your setup is working.
If not, please check the configuration of your router / DNS if the Rebind Protection is active or [enable the LocalStack DNS on your system]({{< ref "dns-server#system-dns-configuration" >}}).

> ## System DNS configuration

Reviewer: I like this section, it's nice to have a proper numbered walkthrough!

If you wish to use the DNS server on your host system, you need to expose the LocalStack DNS server and configure your operating system.
This is necessary if you want to test unmodified application code directly on your system against LocalStack and cannot configure the endpoint URL.

{{< alert title="Warning" color="warning">}}
Please be careful when changing the network configuration on your system, as this may have undesired side effects.

> Restore the default configuration after testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember to restore the default configuration after testing.
```

perhaps?

Author: better 👍 
or even more immediately actionable: "Remember to save the default configuration and restore it after testing.
